Mikael Onsjö, 2020-05-16 London

A Pinegrovian Anecdote
======================

Prof. Peter Pinegrove is traveling, humbly in business class of course, back to Japan where he looks forwards to seeing his obedient traditionalist Japanese wife Emiko, after having visited a prestigious anarcho-syndicalist conference in Vermont, New England. It had been a good conference. People were very polite, and Prof. Chompety himself had taken pains to shake Peter's hand. As well he should: Peter is practically bankrolling the whole community, using the vast fortunes he accumulated through his bio-informatics company when it stumbled upon a miraculous cure for the 2019 human coronavirus. One of Peter's employees at the time, his "code monkey" in fact, Mathieu, had come up with an ingenious bit of DNA coding that somehow proved key to synthesizing a serum. Peter himself was still vague on the details, but he did not let little things like that stop him from taking full credit for the discovery. It's a "publish and let perish world", after all. So now Peter has the second larges private fortune on Earth, and journalists have a neverending source of alliterations for sycophantic headlines such as "Professor Peter Pinegrove: Proudest, most Prestigious Polymath since Pythagoras." 

He himself is not one to complain. The unexpected windfall allowed Peter to exit bio-informatics, never to set eye on an obnoxious shrimp DNA ever again. He is free to focus on his two real passions in life: Communism, and SETI - the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. These two pursuits may seem like odd bedfellows, but to Peter it is quite logical: The more capitalism creates wealth, the more it sows the seeds of its own destruction. It follows that any advanced civilization which survives to explore the universe, must be anti-capitalist in nature. In the broad sense of things, that means they are communists of one sort or another. The mission of SETI is to determine as quickly as possible whether they are the right sort, lest humanity should find itself consigned to a space-gulag. As far as Peter is concerned, there is only one true communism, that is anarcho-syndicalism, and Professor Noel Chompety is its prophet.

The man next to Peter, a corpulent capitalist fat-cat if ever there was one, leans back to take a nap, and Peter moves to do likewise then arrests his recline. He has one more task left on his daily agenda and, as the flight will arrive early in the morning local time, the task must be completed now or never. Peter brings out his phone and switches on the neural mode. He closes his eyes and waits for the mental Star Trek inspired klaxon which announces that a wireless neural interface connection, a wee-nic it is called, is ready to engage. It does not take long and Peter is soon composing his social media post for Twitter. Today's post is a perennial exercise: Peter writes movingly about his late employee and good friend, Mathieu, who tragically drove himself to "karoshi" (the Japanese word for death by overwork) through autodefenestration. Having been the owner of the company, naturally Peter bears the ultimate responsibility for his employees untimely demise. This had all happened during the apogee of the covid-19 crisis, however, and no one really blames Peter for the one unfortunate incident of self-slaughter. The fact that Peter himself came up with the miracle cure only weeks later is vindication enough. What is one stressed out employee's life next to the lives of millions that would have succumbed to the coronavirus? Be that as it may, in order to preempt criticism Peter had begun a habit of periodically posting memorial tweets for his late subordinate. He kept it up now, many years later, because if nothing else, it is also a good opportunity to remind the world of what comes of capitalist greed. Ending the the little composition with a clever witticism aimed at the incoming neo-liberal Prime Minister of Canada, Peter submits the whole thing for publication with a thought, then lets himself drift off to sleep.

Nothing would now please your humble narrator more than to continue to relay Peter's story in all its intricate, perchance discombobulated, detail as he has hitherto. Alas, time is scarce and we must now make do with an abbreviated summary of the events.

Peter arrives at the Itami airport in Osaka early in the morning just as planned. At the immigration fast-track desk he is taken aback when the official there presents him with an entry-fee of 52.7 million yen. This is outrageous and patently illegal, Peter asserts. Lawyers are then called in to show him the relevant law. It was passed by the airport syndicate committee the same morning. Peter does not understand how an airport can pass laws at all, but spots a way out: "Aha!", he exclaims, "this law is for people name Peter Pinegrowth. Pinegrowth! Look at my passport, my name is Peter Pinegrove. You have the wrong man!" Alas, the airport constitutional ombudsman is quickly able to determine that this is a typo, and that the intention of the lawmakers was clearly to charge the Peter that stood in front of them. Grumbling, Peter pays the amount owed and makes his way out of the airport to where his private chauffeur is waiting.

The driver does not take Peter home, however. It transpires that the limousine syndicate, of which Peter had never heard, had just passed some Pinegrove-specific laws of their own. Peter must pay his way through a Kafkaesque nightmare of syndicates. Gangsters appear. Lucy Liu is there. There are shootouts, sword fights, and car chases. There's an atomic explosion. Fortunately, Peter trained as a pro wrestler back in university and knows a thing or two about arm locks. After defeating innumerous antagonists through an Odyssean (though some may say Finneganean) journey, Peter finally arrives home to his beloved, obedient Japanese wife Emiko Yamane Pinegrove. There is romance, but we will leave them their privacy. Somewhat later, Emiko explains to Peter what has really transpired.

Emiko had found Peter's old SETI equipment and been curious enough to start playing around with it. She quickly made contact with some sort of intelligence who, it seems, had deliberately avoided Peter and his people. Even so, Peter is surprised and impressed by Emiko's unexpected genius in decoding a completely alien mode of communication. Who would have thought a humble Japanese girl had it in her? At any rate, Emiko had struck up a rapport with the alien intelligence. Then, when a few days ago, she read Peter's phoney and self-serving social media message about the late friend and code monkey, she had been  upset. Peter, Mathieu, and Emiko had all been friends and when she was suddenly forced to choose between Mathieu and Peter, it had been tough. It was but by a hair that love prevailed, and she sided with Peter. Emiko confessed all this to the alien intelligence, who suggested they teach Peter a sorely needed lesson in humility. The alien intelligence, who is in fact a post-singularity artificial intelligence named Krakow, clandestinely took control of Peter's mobile phone. Through it, Emiko and Krakow were able to access the neural interface and influence Peter's brain directly. They invented for Peter a bleak anarcho-syndicalist dystopia, which he experienced after the plane landed. All the weird things Peter had encountered since then were just carefully crafted hallucinations. She hadn't counted on Peter leaving such devastating collateral damage in his wake, however, and tearfully begs his forgiveness. This is not withheld, and there is further romance.

As the police arrives to take Peter away to face whatever charges are apt to describe the reckless destruction of half a maga-city, your devoted narrator invites the reader to ponder how a humble Japanese traditionalist girl, and a self-assured Canadian communist prodigy, can have found solace in each other.



