Mikael Onsjö, 2020-06-27 London

A Mnemoclonal Dilemma
=====================

Dear General Sheridanus: First of all let me congratulate you on your extraordinary promotion. Thank you for letting me remain in my current role. There was nothing personal in my objection to the Ministry of Order's recommendation: I am merely worried about the politicization of a scientific project. And I'm sure you are aware the fact that you are related to the minister will raise eyebrows. Nevertheless, your career at the Halifax Academy of Interplanetary Relations is flawless. I haven't seen any other curriculum vitae with so many outstanding qualifications. 

I know you are well versed in all the technical aspects pertaining to the current mission. There are, however, some important information that you will not be aware of as it is rather strictly classified. I think you will very soon receive privileged access to ITERN, and a perhaps overwhelming amount of background information. Your abilities with the keyboard are manifold and documented, but if you have any trouble with the system let me know and I will have someone chastise it for you. 

There is one matter of which I would like to appraise you right away. It is relevant to our crew selection process, and quite urgent. Let me tell you some things about the previous mission. The official version is not entirely accurate. You may even find it hard to piece together from the reports in ITERN. My own role in the affair gives me a unique perspective, I think it is safe to say. Though I wasn't there, I recall the voyage vividly. It is a strange thing to mnemoclonal experiences reincorporated into one's gray matter. But I digress.

The Aderendi wormhole is located some 0.4 light years from Alpha Centauri and almost exactly 4 light years from Earth. CEF-5 "Yggdrasil"should be able to traverse this distance in around 140 years. For CEF-4 "Bifrost" it took 174.2 years. At the outset, this was two times longer than the longest manned journey yet undertaken. Nevertheless, we felt there were sufficient precedent that we could be confident that relevant problems had been analyzed and understood. We knew that the problem was far from trivial.

A mission so far away from Earth cannot possibly be directed entirely from Earth. An agent capable of handling the various situations that may arise must be aboard. This agent must be both able and inclined to make decisions quickly and in a way that closely matches the interests of the mission, insofar as possible. Entrusting a mission of this importance to any sort of machine intelligence is out of the question. Yet having a human aboard a mission that takes decades poses numerous problems. The material ones we can solve, albeit with much effort. It's the mental ones that pose a real problem. Personal development, specifically, is the little thing that gets in the way. A century and half is an extraordinary time for a human mind. Cosmonauts used sometimes go insane, or develop radical objectives that are contrary to the objectives of the mission. Most often, however, they developed in seemingly minor ways that nevertheless eventually impaired on their judgment. Most notably, the human mind when lacking immediate purpose tends to grow lazy and not hone its skill as it needs. We used to send out our best and brightest geniuses, to centuries later receive idiots back. You may even be acquainted with two from Halifax Academy, who eventually settled into low pressure teaching roles there.

All of this was well understood when we embarked on Bifrost. Several precautions were already standard practice. Most notably, we had started using mnemetic clones: minds cloned from the most promising candidates, and conditioned in several ways to make them more suitable. A crucial point is the guarantee they have that their thoughts and experiences will be transmitted back and incorporated into the original. This fact along with some other tricks ensures that individual minds continue to regard themselves more as an extension of the original, than as distinct from her or him. They can go one a one way mission safe in the knowledge not only that their contribution will benefit their race, but also that their experiences will live on even when their body expires, much in the way they do when you raise children and teach the children your ideas and values. It goes without saying that we select only candidates who have successfully raise families before. Given the intelligence requirements, none of our candidates have ever lacked a procreation permit, and given the status implied few choose not to make use of it. But again I digress.

A schedule has evolved wherein the crew generally spends about one part of their time awake and active, to six parts in mid level hibernation (where lucid dreaming is possible). Naturally they are free to adjust this as and how it may appeal to them, but we make sure beforehand that the members appreciate that the routine is the best one for the mission as well as their own mental health. In hibernation they are linked to the extent that they sense each other's presence and have vague exchanges of sentiments, but do not speak directly. This typically channels their inclination on the same direction so that they choose to socialize more with each other during on-time, which is crucial for social cohesion. A small, but not insignificant, number of missions have failed because of emerged group dysfunction that was impossible to predict. We know, however, that the risk decreases significantly the more similar the members are to each other. By the time of CEF-4 we considered it best simply to use clones of one and the same person. And as you know, it happened to be I that time.

The experience of being cloned is nondescript. You spend most of the time in low level hibernation, with brief episodes of dream hibernation in between. That's all. Having the mnemetic experiences reincorporated, on the other hand, is an experience I can't describe. Suddenly you have several different memories of the same world. The mind copes with this largely by spacing the memories out in a temporal sense, even those that co-occurred. It is rather confusing. Imagine having a mirror in front of you and the way everything appears reversed, lefts becoming rights and so one. With a little practice it is not particularly difficult to get used to this world and operate within it. But imagine having not only to switch between the two constantly, but to move in them simultaneously. Then add three more mirrors. This is a slight embellishment, perhaps, since I don't have to actually move around in my memory world, but it can give an idea of the befuddlement the mind faces when first encountering it. There are seeming incongruities at every corner.

I remember waking up after the procedure. Then I remember waking up after it in a different place. Then I remember waking up after it in that sort of same place again, but everything being different. This four times, though mercifully things are blurred now so that I can't really recall many details. Likewise, the main sense of myself that I had in each of my incarnations was virtually identical. Imagine yourself in a past where your right arm was cloned into four copies that though identical, moved independently. None of my clones resented the situation, they had all been conditioned feel as extensions of the one and same being. We all had purpose, and it was the same purpose. Not having undergone conditioning myself, of course, I have a peculiar sense of pity, affection, superiority, and revulsion with respect to the clones. They never knew. But they would if I ever did it again, so mercifully I'm no longer a candidate.

But these musing probably don't interest you, so on to the mission. There is preciously little of a story to tell here, seeing as not much happens during a space voyage. There was no individual training for my clones as, naturally, it is far more effective to train only the original in the maintenance of the expedition. Besides, I planned most of it. We simply embarked as planned and began our intended routine. We had a peculiar feeling of leaving Earth and all that we knew behind forever, but at the same time we knew it was not forever because our experiences would come back and we'd continue our existence in the original me. It's a little like having a limb replaced: I sent my arms off into the unknown, but what matters that since I had other arms right away?

My clones got along fabulously, as clones usually do, and our social activities were not qualitatively different from what other crews do. We played games and exchanged thoughts about the various literature we consumed. I didn't realize I had a passion for poker before, and perhaps I didn't until my clones developed it. Our first game was captivating since we were so equally matched and also understood each other's thinking intimately. We involved machine players, of course, and made a sport out of beggaring them while playing the real game of defeating each other. A decade into the journey we were still enjoying this activity so much that we had changed our schedule to one day on, one day off, and spent most of the time playing variations on poker tournaments. The challenge of these games of chance and statistics matched us perfectly as we were all essentially the same, and the challenge increased tantalizingly in lockstep with our ability. It became quite addictive.

The obsessive nature of our interaction coupled with the drastically increased uptime was not something our clone conditioning program had been designed for. In addition to our personalities developing far faster than what is desirable, we also started to piece together things that the conditioning had meant to obscure. We became cognizant of the true nature of the expedition and it's cargo, which it had been thought desirable to keep concealed. Furthermore we started questioning the wisdom of it.

We (and now I mean "us" as in the scientific community) believe that the Aderendi Culture poses a threat to humanity. Indeed, the location they choose for their wormhole gate into our part of the galaxy is suspicious. They could have made it appear near our solar system to foster direct communication if, as they say, all they wish is to trade ideas and offer us wonderful new technology. Conversely, they might have chosen a remote star system if they wished simply to expand in peace. The fact that they choose a remarkably close by system is not an accident. Whether their intention is directly hostile or not, they must have considered that this is the strategically correct place to build a power base that we cannot threaten. Whether the intention is peaceful coexistence, domination, or even eradication of humanity before it can became an interstellar civilization, is relatively immaterial: History tells us that history could move in either of these ways, the intentions of the actors notwithstanding. We must take steps to protect ourselves from potential extinction, and do so before it is too late.

This is not the conclusion that my game-crazed clones came to after nearly two centuries of analyzing, strategizing, and philosophizing. Or rather, they came to a similar conclusion but considered that in the grander scheme of things, our response would actually increase the risk of humanity's destruction. You see, as we have every reason to believe that the wormhole emanates on the other side quite close to the Aderendi home world, the doomsday device (to use an old sci-fi cliché) we planned on depositing in it would very likely have caused much damage to their civilization. Certainly they have other colonies by now, however, and seeing as we ourselves don't know the first thing about creating wormholes (or traversing them for that matter) we'd have most certainly made a mortal and very powerful enemy. Well, I'm sure you are familiar with this old argument. Suffice it to say that my clones developed into xenopacifists and decided to terminate the mission.

It is peculiar to reflect that my clones had such arrogance that they thought themselves better suited than the leaders of Earth to decide mankind's fate. I certainly received much to reflect on when I learned about it. Not that it was the only thing: There was for example the incident where Third decided to close the airlock and save himself, leaving Second to his gruesome fate. Is that really me, I wonder, or did they develop tendencies that I need not answer for, over their two centuries en route? Or am I answerable for it since their experiences are now part of me?

Be all that as it may. The purpose of my long rambling letter is this: Your decision to crew Yggdrasil with your own mnemetic clones is wrong. They may not end up in the same situation that mine did, but risk of some sort of self-reinforcing bad tendency is simply too great. I can't go along with it. Please accept my resignation.






